2023 Formula 1 Fantasy Game Rules
---------------------------------

The following rules are based on [The Official Formula 1 Fantasy Game](https://fantasy.formula1.com/en/game-rules) for the 2023 season. While the official game allows for the creation of multiple teams, the rules apply independently to each team, so they are distilled here for a single team.

#### Team

A team consist of 5 drivers and 2 constructors, and must stay within the cost cap of $100m. Prices for the drivers and constructors will be updated after each race, increasing or decreasing based on their performance, and will remain fixed until the next Grand Prix.

#### DRS Boost

For each race weekend, a _DRS Boost_ can be applied to any one driver in a team. This will double the driver's score for the Grand Prix.[^1]

#### Chips

_Chips_ can be applied to a team or driver for a race weekend, to provide special power-ups like a x3 score multiplier for a driver, or allowing wholesale changes to a team's line-up. There are six expendable chips available, each of which can only be used once during the season, and only one chip can be used per race weekend.[^2]

#### Transfers

A transfer allows changing a driver or constructor from a team's lineup. Prior to every race weekend, 2 free transfers are available for a team. Each additional transfer will incur a 4 point penalty for the team. 1 unused free transfer carries over to the next race weekend. However, this must be used for the following race and carry-overs won't accumulate throughout the season.

## Scoring

Points are awarded/deducted based on the Driver/Constructor's performance at a Grand Prix. Classifications throughout the weekend are based on the decisions made by the FIA and Formula 1®.

* ### Qualifying
    * #### Drivers
        ##### Qualifying Result

        | Position | Points |
        | -------- | ------ |
        | Pole (1st) | 10 |
        | 2nd | 9 |
        | 3rd | 8 |
        | 4th | 7 |
        | 5th | 6 |
        | 6th | 5 |
        | 7th | 4 |
        | 8th | 3 |
        | 9th | 2 |
        | 10th | 1 |
        | 11th+ | 0 |
        | NC/No time set * | -5 |
        | DQ | -15 |

        \* Drivers who do not set a time in Q1 are given a 5 point penalty

    * #### Constructors

        Constructors score the combined total of their two drivers in Qualifying, as listed above. Constructors also score points for achieving one of the following:

        | Achievement | Points |
        | ----------- | ------ |
        | Neither driver reaches Q2 | -1 |
        | One driver reaches Q2 | 1 |
        | Both drivers reach Q2 | 3 |
        | One driver reaches Q3 | 5 |
        | Both drivers reach Q3 | 10 |

* ### Sprint
    * #### Drivers

        | Achievement | Points |
        | ----------- | ------ |
        | Positions gained[^3] | 1 per position |
        | Positions lost | -1 per position |
        | Overtakes made[^4] | 1 per overtake |
        | Fastest lap | 5 |

        ##### Sprint Result

        | Position | Points |
        | -------- | ------ |
        | 1st | 8 |
        | 2nd | 7 |
        | 3rd | 6 |
        | 4th | 5 |
        | 5th | 4 |
        | 6th | 3 |
        | 7th | 2 |
        | 8th | 1 |
        | 9th+ | 0 |
        | DNF/Not classified | -20 |
        | DQ | -25 |

    * #### Constructors

        Constructors score the combined total of their two drivers in the Sprint, as listed above.

* ### Race
    * #### Drivers

        | Achievement | Points |
        | ----------- | ------ |
        | Positions gained[^3] | 1 per position |
        | Positions lost | -1 per position |
        | Overtakes made[^4] | 1 per overtake |
        | Fastest lap | 10 |
        | Driver Of The Day[^5] | 10 (Driver only) |

        ##### Race Result

        | Position | Points |
        | -------- | ------ |
        | 1st | 25 |
        | 2nd | 18 |
        | 3rd | 15 |
        | 4th | 12 |
        | 5th | 10 |
        | 6th | 8 |
        | 7th | 6 |
        | 8th | 4 |
        | 9th | 2 |
        | 10th | 1 |
        | 11th+ | 0 |
        | DNF/Not classified | -20 |
        | DQ | -25 |

    * #### Constructors

        Constructors score the combined total of their two drivers in the Race as listed above, with the exception of the Driver Of the Day bonus. Constructors also score points for the following:

        | Achievement | Points |
        | ----------- | ------ |
        | Fastest pitstop | 10 |
        | 2nd fastest pitstop | 5 |
        | 3rd fastest pitstop | 3 |

        A single constructor may score up to 18 points by recording the 3 fastest pitstop times in the race.

* ### Team Management

    | Violation | Points |
    | --------- | ------ |
    | Exceeding the free transfer allowance | -4 (per additional transfer) |

## Chips

The following six chips are available to be applied to a team or driver for a race weekend. Each chip can only be used once throughout the season, and only one chip can be used per race weekend. The _Wildcard_, _Limitless_, and _Final Fix_ chips are only available after the first Grand Prix.

* **Autopilot**: Will change the DRS Boost selection and give it to the highest scoring driver in a team, if that turns out to be different to the original choice.
* **Extra DRS Boost**: The chosen driver gets a x3 multiplier to their score for the Grand Prix weekend. The _DRS Boost_ and _Extra DRS Boost_ cannot be applied to the same driver for a race weekend.
* **No Negative**: No drivers or constructor will score any negative points. Points will still be deducted for making more than the permitted number of free transfers.
* **Wildcard**: Allows unlimited number of transfers before a race weekend. This chip is only available after the first race weekend, since there are no "transfers" for the original team configuration.
* **Limitless**: Allows unlimited transfers before a race weekend, and no cost cap. The original team is restored after the race. This chip is only available after the first race weekend.
* **Final Fix**: Allows a single transfer to a team between the end of Qualifying and the start of the Grand Prix. It does not incur a penalty if all the free transfers have been used. The points already scored by the driver/team being removed will be kept, and the incoming selection will only score points for the next track session (Sprint or Race) onwards. This chip is only available after the first race weekend. If a driver with the _DRS Boost_ is removed, then the _DRS Boost_ is applied to the incoming driver; it cannot be changed. The original team selection will be restored following the Race.[^6][^7]

[^1]: The DRS Boost only applies to the selected driver, it does not affect the points scored by constructors.
[^2]: The _Wildcard_, _Limitless_, and _Final Fix_ chips are only available after the first Grand Prix.
[^3]: Positions gained/lost are calculated based on the starting and finishing position of the driver in the race and not their qualifying result. Unclassified drivers do not have any positions lost calculated, instead they receive the -20point penalty. Cars starting from the pitlane are considered to have started from a position relative to the last car on the grid.
[^4]: Overtakes are considered valid when one driver legally passes another on track, and the driver passed was not entering or in the pit lane or suffering a car failure or going unreasonably slow.
[^5]: Driver Of The Day is the result of the official F1® Driver Of The Day award.
[^6]: **UNCLEAR**: Will _Final Fix_ restore _all_ transfers after a race weekend, or just the _Final Fix_ transfer?
[^7]: **UNCLEAR**: Must the cost cap be respected with the _Final Fix_ transfer?
